


=Customers=

==Description==

The Customers application allows you to manage your client base within SaltOS4.
It centralizes all information related to customers, such as identification, contact details,
tax code, address, and classification. It also serves as a hub to link customers with other
modules like quotes, invoices, meetings, and emails.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Name: Full name or business name of the customer.
- CIF: Customer's tax identification code (NIF, CIF, VAT, etc.).
- Country: Country where the customer is legally registered or operates.
- Email: Main email address for communication.
- Phone: Primary contact phone number.
- Type: Category the customer belongs to (e.g., regular, VIP).
- Active: Indicates if the customer is active in the system.


==Form view==

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing a customer record.

- In **create** mode, the form is empty and ready to enter new data.
- In **view** mode, the fields are filled with the selected record and cannot be edited.
- In **edit** mode, the form is pre-filled and allows modifications.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Name: Full name or business name of the customer.
- CIF: Customer's tax identification code.
- Address: Main physical or billing address.
- City: City or locality of the customer.
- ZIP: Postal code corresponding to the address.
- Country: Country of registration.
- Phone: Contact number.
- Email: Email for notifications or invoices.
- Type: Customer category or classification.
- Active: Enables or disables the customer visibility.
- Notes: Internal notes related to the customer.


==Delete==

Records can be deleted from the list view via the delete action.
A confirmation prompt will appear before the operation is executed.

This action is irreversible and requires specific permissions.
