


+Meetings+

++Description++

The Meetings application allows you to schedule, organize, and track meetings with leads, customers, or internal staff.
It supports planning both face-to-face and online meetings, storing relevant details such as date, time, participants, notes, and status.
This module is essential for keeping a history of client interactions, improving follow-up, and maintaining team coordination.

++List view++

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Date: Scheduled date of the meeting.
- Time: Scheduled time for the meeting.
- Subject: Title or topic of the meeting.
- Customer: Participant or client associated with the meeting.
- Type: Classification of the meeting (e.g., call, on-site visit, video conference).
- Status: Current state of the meeting (e.g., Planned, Completed, Cancelled).
- Assigned To: Person responsible for attending or organizing the meeting.


++Form view++

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing a meeting entry.

- In **create** mode, a new meeting is scheduled.
- In **view** mode, details are shown read-only for reference or audit.
- In **edit** mode, the meeting details can be modified if needed.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Date: Day the meeting is planned to occur.
- Time: Scheduled time (optional if the meeting is full-day).
- Subject: Brief title or summary of the meeting.
- Customer: Linked participant or external contact.
- Type: Meeting format or category.
- Status: Progress state of the meeting (e.g., Confirmed, Done).
- Assigned To: Internal user or employee leading the meeting.
- Location: Physical address or virtual link for the meeting.
- Notes: Additional observations or meeting agenda.
- Files: Attachments such as reports, presentations, or confirmations.


++Delete++

Meetings can be deleted from the list view if created in error or no longer relevant.

Records are usually kept for historical traceability unless explicit removal is needed.
