


+Quotes+

++Description++

The Quotes application is used to create and manage commercial proposals sent to customers.
Each quote contains line items with products or services, pricing, taxes, and conditions.
This module is tightly integrated with Customers and Products, and allows for tracking the status of each quote
(e.g., Draft, Sent, Accepted). When a quote is accepted, it can be converted into an invoice.

++List view++

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Customer: Name of the customer to whom the quote is addressed.
- CIF: Tax identification code of the customer.
- Quote: Internal reference code of the quote.
- Date: Date the quote was issued.
- Total: Total amount of the quote including taxes.


++Form view++

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing a quote.

- In **create** mode, the form is empty and allows you to build a new quote.
- In **view** mode, it displays a finalized quote without editing capabilities.
- In **edit** mode, it shows a draft quote ready for modification.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Customer: Selected client to whom the quote is addressed.
- CIF: Tax identification number of the customer.
- Quote: Internal reference number for the quote.
- Date: Emission date of the quote.
- Status: Current state of the quote (Draft, Sent, Accepted).
- Valid Until: Expiration date for the offer.
- Payment Terms: Conditions agreed for future payment if accepted.
- Delivery Date: Expected delivery date for the goods or services.
- Notes: Internal comments or specific conditions related to this quote.
- Total: Automatically calculated amount based on lines and taxes.


Quote lines are also included as a subtable, where each line contains product, quantity, price, tax, and discount.

++Delete++

Quotes can be deleted from the list view if they are not yet accepted.
A confirmation prompt will appear before deletion.

This action is irreversible and subject to user permissions.
