


=Purchases=

==Description==

The Purchase application is used to register and track purchases made from suppliers.
Each purchase record includes invoice details, total amount, purchase date, and associated notes or attachments.
This module ensures traceability of expenses and is linked to the Suppliers module to maintain consistency.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Supplier: Name of the supplier from whom the purchase was made.
- CIF: Tax code of the supplier at the time of purchase.
- Invoice: Reference number of the supplier's invoice.
- Date: Date the purchase invoice was issued.
- Total: Total amount of the purchase including taxes.
- Notes: Summary or internal note associated with the purchase.
- Active: Indicates whether the record is active in the system.


==Form view==

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing a purchase record.

- In **create** mode, the form is used to enter a new purchase linked to a supplier.
- In **view** mode, it shows the details of the recorded purchase, in read-only mode.
- In **edit** mode, the information can be updated if necessary.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Supplier: Linked supplier selected from the supplier list.
- CIF: Fiscal ID copied from the supplier at the time of purchase.
- Invoice: Supplier invoice number or reference.
- Date: Invoice issue date.
- Notes: Internal notes about the purchase (optional).
- Total: Total amount of the purchase invoice.
- Active: Toggles whether the record is in use or archived.


==Delete==

Purchase records can be deleted only if they are not linked to accounting records or processes.
A confirmation dialog will appear before proceeding.

Once registered and finalized, deletion is restricted based on system permissions and traceability.
