


+Suppliers+

++Description++

The Suppliers application is used to manage the list of vendors or external providers the organization works with.
It stores essential information such as identification, contact details, tax code, and classification.
This module is linked to purchase workflows, allowing you to associate suppliers with purchases and maintain full traceability.

++List view++

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Name: Full name or business name of the supplier.
- CIF: Tax identification number of the supplier.
- Country: Country where the supplier is based or registered.
- Email: Primary contact email address.
- Phone: Main contact number for communication.
- Type: Classification of the supplier (e.g., hardware, services).
- Active: Indicates if the supplier is active and visible in the system.


++Form view++

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing supplier records.

- In **create** mode, the form is blank to add a new supplier.
- In **view** mode, the fields are shown in read-only mode.
- In **edit** mode, supplier data can be updated.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Name: Full legal or commercial name of the supplier.
- CIF: Supplier’s tax identification code (e.g., NIF, VAT).
- Address: Main business or billing address.
- City: City where the supplier is located.
- ZIP: Postal code for the address.
- Country: Country of registration.
- Phone: Contact number for follow-up or orders.
- Email: Email address for communication or purchase notifications.
- Type: Supplier classification by service or category.
- Notes: Internal remarks or annotations.
- Active: Controls whether the supplier is enabled or archived.


++Delete++

Supplier records can be deleted if not referenced in purchases or documents.
A confirmation dialog appears before deletion.

Once linked to purchases or financial records, the supplier becomes protected from removal.
