


+Config Log+

++Description++

The Config Log application provides a trace of all configuration changes made within SaltOS4.
It is used to monitor modifications to system parameters, app settings, or internal preferences.
This module is essential for administrators who want to audit changes and ensure consistent system behavior over time.

++List view++

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Datetime: Timestamp of when the configuration change occurred.
- User: System user who made the change.
- Action: Type of action performed (e.g., create, update, delete).
- Object: Target element that was changed (e.g., setting, app config).
- Detail: Description or summary of the change.


++View entry++

This view displays the full details of a single configuration change record.

[Insert screenshot of the view entry here]

It includes:

- Datetime: Exact date and time of the action.
- User: Name or ID of the user who performed the action.
- IP Address: Origin of the connection when the change was made.
- Object: Affected configuration element.
- Action: Nature of the operation (insert, update, delete).
- Previous Value: Value before the change (if available).
- New Value: Value after the change (if applicable).
- Context: Technical information or internal path related to the configuration.


++Delete++

Entries in the config log cannot be deleted under normal circumstances.

This log is designed to ensure full traceability and auditability of administrative actions.
