


=Certificates=

==Description==

The Certificates application is used to manage and track SSL/TLS certificates stored or monitored by the system.
This module allows administrators to register certificates, store metadata, monitor expiration dates,
and ensure that security infrastructure remains up-to-date.

It is especially useful for managing certificates for custom domains, internal services, or external integrations.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Domain: Domain or hostname the certificate applies to.
- Type: Certificate authority or format (e.g., Let's Encrypt, Self-signed).
- Expiration: Date the certificate will expire.
- Status: Current state (Valid, Expiring Soon, Expired).
- Notes: Internal notes about the certificate.


==Form view==

This view is used to add, review, or update certificate information.

[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Domain: FQDN or hostname secured by the certificate.
- Type: Source or authority that issued the certificate.
- Expiration: Date on which the certificate will expire.
- Status: Optional status (may be auto-calculated).
- Certificate: Full certificate content (PEM, CRT, etc.).
- Notes: Remarks about usage or renewal schedule.
- Active: Indicates whether the certificate is currently monitored.


==Delete==

Certificates can be deleted if no longer relevant.

However, it is recommended to retain expired entries for audit purposes.
