


=Company=

==Description==

The Company application stores the identification and contact details of the organization using SaltOS4.
This data is used across the system to personalize documents (quotes, invoices, emails, etc.) and define the legal and fiscal identity of the company.

It typically includes the company's name, tax code, address, logo, and preferred language.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Name: Registered name of the company.
- Code: Tax identification code (e.g., VAT, CIF, NIF).
- Country: Country where the company is based.
- Email: Main contact or support address.
- Phone: Company phone number.
- Active: Indicates whether the profile is in use (usually only one is active).


==Form view==

This view is used to define or edit the company profile.

[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Name: Legal or commercial name of the organization.
- Code: Fiscal code of the company (e.g., NIF, VAT).
- Address: Registered business address.
- City: City of the main office.
- ZIP: Postal code for correspondence.
- Country: Country of operation or registration.
- Phone: Primary contact number.
- Email: General contact or support email.
- Language: Default language used for documents and UI.
- Logo: Image representing the company, used in PDF and web headers.
- Notes: Optional internal observations.
- Active: Enables the profile as the default company identity.


==Delete==

The company profile cannot be deleted if it's the only active one in the system.

Only deactivation is allowed in most configurations.
