


=Emails=

==Description==

The Emails application is used to receive, view, and reply to emails from configured accounts within SaltOS4.
It acts as a simplified integrated email client that supports reading messages from POP3 or IMAP,
viewing metadata and content, and replying using internal or external SMTP servers.

Each message is presented as a visual card in the list view, showing key fields such as sender, subject,
date, and a preview of the body. Emails can be viewed in detail, replied to, or deleted. This app is
closely integrated with the Emails Accounts module and is essential for managing inbound communication.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The list view shows incoming emails as clickable buttons or cards.
Each entry typically displays:

- From / To: Depending on whether the message was received or sent.
- Subject: The subject line of the email.
- Snippet: A short preview of the body content.
- Datetime: When the message was received or sent.
- Attachments: An indicator showing if files are attached.


The interface also includes filters and a search form to filter by sender, subject, account, and date.

==View message==

This view shows the full content of an email message, including header metadata and attachments.

[Insert screenshot of the email view screen here]

The following information is typically displayed:

- From: Sender's email address.
- To / CC / BCC: Recipients of the message.
- Subject: The subject line.
- Datetime: The exact timestamp of the message.
- UIDL: Internal identifier from the mail server.
- Body: Full content of the message.
- Attachments: List of downloadable files.


==Reply / Compose==

Users can reply to an existing message or compose a new email using a simplified form.

[Insert screenshot of the reply/compose view here]

The reply form includes:

- From: Email account used to send the message.
- To: Main recipient(s) of the email.
- CC / BCC: Optional carbon/blind copies.
- Subject: Subject of the message (pre-filled when replying).
- Body: Message content (rich text or plain).
- Attachments: Optional files to attach.


==Delete==

Emails can be deleted from the list view using the delete icon or action.

Messages are usually deleted locally or flagged for deletion, depending on the server configuration.
