


+Emails Accounts+

++Description++

The Emails Accounts application is used to configure and manage the email accounts connected to SaltOS4.
Each account can be used to send and receive emails via SMTP, IMAP or POP3 protocols.
This module allows integration with external email providers and supports authentication, folders, and synchronization options.

++List view++

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Name: Descriptive name of the account for internal reference.
- Email: Email address configured for the account.
- Type: Protocol used (e.g., IMAP, POP3).
- Server: Incoming server hostname.
- Port: Network port used for incoming mail.
- Active: Indicates whether the account is enabled for use.


++Form view++

This view is used to create, view or edit an email account.

- In **create** mode, a new account is configured from scratch.
- In **view** mode, account settings are shown without allowing changes.
- In **edit** mode, the configuration can be updated or corrected.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Name: Internal label for the account.
- Email: Actual email address being configured.
- Type: Protocol for incoming messages (IMAP or POP3).
- Username: Login credential for server authentication.
- Password: Secret key used to access the account.
- Incoming Server: Hostname of the email provider's incoming server.
- Incoming Port: Port used to retrieve messages.
- Use SSL: Whether to use a secure connection for incoming emails.
- Outgoing Server (SMTP): Server used to send messages.
- Outgoing Port: Port used to deliver messages.
- SMTP Username: Credential for sending mail (if different).
- SMTP Password: Authentication password for sending (if needed).
- Signature: Default email signature attached to outgoing messages.
- Active: Enables or disables the account.


++Delete++

Accounts can be deleted if they are not in use or connected to recent email activity.

Disabling is preferred when preserving configuration for future use or audit.
