


+Invoices+

++Description++

The Invoices application is used to issue and manage customer billing records.
Each invoice contains product or service lines, quantities, unit prices, taxes, and discounts.
This module supports both pro forma and finalized invoices, tracks payment status,
and integrates with the Customers, Products, and Taxes modules.
It also provides traceability for due dates, payment dates, and links to related documents.

++List view++

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Customer: Name of the customer billed in the invoice.
- CIF: Customer’s tax identification code.
- Invoice: Unique internal reference of the invoice.
- Date: Date the invoice was issued.
- Total: Final amount including taxes and discounts.
- Paid: Indicates whether the invoice has been paid.
- Due Date: Date by which the payment is expected.


++Form view++

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing an invoice.

- In **create** mode, the form is empty and allows the user to generate a new invoice, including pro forma invoices.
- In **view** mode, it shows a finalized invoice in read-only mode.
- In **edit** mode, it allows modifying a draft invoice or correcting information before finalization.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Customer: Selected client for this invoice.
- CIF: Tax ID of the customer at the time of invoicing.
- Invoice: Internal reference number (auto-generated or manual).
- Date: Official date of invoice emission.
- Status: Indicates whether the invoice is draft, closed, or cancelled.
- Payment Terms: Conditions agreed with the customer.
- Due Date: Deadline for the invoice payment.
- Paid: Marks the invoice as fully paid.
- Paid Date: Date on which payment was received.
- Notes: Internal notes or extra conditions.
- Total: Total invoice amount based on line items and taxes.


Invoices also include line items (product, quantity, price, discount, tax) and a breakdown of applied taxes.

++Delete++

Invoices can only be deleted if they are in draft status.
A confirmation prompt is shown before the operation.

Once an invoice is finalized and/or linked to a payment, deletion is restricted.
