


=Products=

==Description==

The Products application manages the catalog of goods and services offered by the organization.
It stores essential details like reference code, price, stock levels, tax rates, and classification.
Products can be linked to quotes, invoices, and purchases, making this module fundamental to sales and inventory workflows.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Name: Descriptive name of the product or service.
- Reference: Internal code used to identify the product.
- Price: Selling price per unit, excluding tax and discounts.
- Stock: Current quantity available in inventory.
- Active: Indicates whether the product is currently offered.
- Type: Classification of the product (e.g., good, service).
- Category: Group or family the product belongs to.


==Form view==

This view is used for creating, editing or viewing a product entry.

- In **create** mode, the form is empty for entering a new product.
- In **view** mode, all fields are read-only and show detailed information.
- In **edit** mode, the product data can be updated or corrected.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Name: Full descriptive name of the product or service.
- Reference: Internal identifier used in quotes and invoices.
- Price: Standard sale price per unit.
- Cost: Internal cost used for margin calculation.
- Stock: Quantity currently in inventory.
- Location: Physical or logical storage location.
- Type: Used to categorize the product for management or reporting.
- Category: Product family or group it belongs to.
- Tax: Default tax rate applied to this product.
- Image: Optional visual representation.
- Description: Additional details or specifications.
- Active: Whether this product is enabled for use.


==Delete==

Products can be deleted from the list view if they are not referenced in active documents.
A confirmation prompt will appear before deletion.

Products linked to invoices, quotes or purchases are protected from deletion.
