


=Workorders=

==Description==

The Workorders application is used to register, plan, and track work tasks or service jobs requested by customers.
Each work order includes information about the requester, the service required, status, dates, assigned staff,
and associated notes or attachments. This module is essential for managing operational activities,
such as technical support, installations, or field services.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Code: Internal reference number of the work order.
- Date: The creation date of the work order.
- Customer: The customer who requested the service.
- Assigned To: The employee or technician responsible for the task.
- Status: Current state of the work order (e.g., Open, In Progress, Closed).
- Description: Short description of the task or service required.


==Form view==

This view is used to create, edit, or view a work order.

- In **create** mode, the form allows registering a new task to be performed.
- In **view** mode, the information is shown as read-only.
- In **edit** mode, the data can be updated based on progress or feedback.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Code: Internal identifier for the work order.
- Date: Date when the request was received or scheduled.
- Customer: Linked customer requesting the service.
- Assigned To: Selected employee or technician responsible for the task.
- Status: Status of the job (e.g., Open, Assigned, In Progress, Completed).
- Type: Category or classification of the work order.
- Description: Short explanation of the service or task.
- Notes: Internal observations or customer-specific instructions.
- Files: Attachments such as documents or images related to the job.


==Delete==

Workorders can be deleted only if they are not linked to completed services or logged actions.

A confirmation prompt is displayed before deletion.
Deactivation is preferred if you want to retain history without exposing the record.
