


=Employees=

==Description==

The Employees application is used to register and manage the personnel working in the organization.
It stores personal and professional data including name, contact information, position, department, and system user link.
This module is typically used in HR workflows to organize staff and optionally associate them with users of the system.

==List view==

[Insert screenshot of the list view here]

The following fields are displayed in the list view:

- Name: Full name of the employee.
- Email: Main contact email address.
- Phone: Contact phone number.
- Department: Department the employee belongs to.
- Position: Job title or role within the organization.
- Active: Indicates if the employee is currently active.


==Form view==

This view is used to create, view or edit employee records.

- In **create** mode, a new employee profile is added.
- In **view** mode, the profile is shown in read-only format.
- In **edit** mode, the profile can be updated.


[Insert screenshot of the form view here]

The form includes the following fields:

- Name: Full name of the staff member.
- Email: Personal or work email address.
- Phone: Contact number for communication.
- Address: Residential or work address.
- City: City where the employee resides.
- ZIP: Postal code of the address.
- Country: Country of residence or work.
- Position: Role or job title of the employee.
- Department: Associated department within the organization.
- User: (Optional) System user linked to this employee profile.
- Notes: Internal notes or additional information.
- Active: Determines whether the profile is enabled or archived.


==Delete==

Employees can be deleted if not linked to system users or historical records.

If in use, the profile must be deactivated instead of deleted.
